# Rome, China, and the Silk Road as Interconnected Spaces

In book six chapter 20 of Pliny’s Natural History he writes of the Seres and their famous tree grown wool which when steeped in water produces a white down. This substance is then, much to the old historian’s consternation, traded to Rome where it is weaved into a dress that, in modern terminology, leaves little to the imagination [^Pliny]. This strange substance does not exist, but what Pliny is attempting to refer to here is Silk and its Chinese producers. From this account which originates in the mid-first century CE we see that China and Chinese goods were familiar to the Romans, though the inaccuracies suggest that direct contact between the two civilizations was scarce or non-existent. Instead trade and what little exchange of ideas existed between the two societies occurred through the Silk Road, a network of trade routes that stretched from Chang’an in China, to Roman cities in the near east.

The interactive map we’ve created attempts to answer the question of how the Silk Road, as it existed in the first and second centuries CE, came to be. Rather than use a map of cities and connecting trade routes, as is often the case in visual representations of the Silk Road, we have opted to instead focus on the territorial boundaries of the major empires and kingdoms that the Silk Road crossed during the first and second century, and during the years leading up to it formation. We opt for this method in order to draw attention away from cities and routes, and towards the geopolitical layout of the states on and surrounding the Silk Road. We will show through the interactive presentation and this short essay that the Silk Road arose because Rome, China, and the states between the two were connected spatially and able to maintain stability within the space they occupied. When the space connecting east to west is stable, trade routes and trading centers emerge. When the space becomes unstable, as is the case during periods of conflict, or when passage through space is blocked, trade routes collapse and the connection from East to West is disrupted.

First we examine how the connection of space and the maintenance of stability applies to the Chinese end of the Silk Road. During and prior to the Han Dynasty of China (202 BCE) knowledge and access to the West was extremely limited. <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[13]._layers[12])"> The Xiongnu</a>, a confederation of nomadic tribes inhabited most what is modern day Mongolia, and the Inner Mongolia, Gansu, and Xinjiang provinces of China. The relationship between the Xiongnu and the Han is best characterized by Xiongnu raids on Han settlements, and Han tribute payments to Xiongnu leaders. Besides the constant threat the Xiongnu posed towards the Han northern border, they also blocked off travel through <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[19]._layers[18])">The Hexi Corridor</a>. To illustrate the impediment this placed on westward travel: Zhang Qian, a Han envoy, spent over 14 years on his mission to establish contact with the Yuezhi in Bactria, of those 14 years he spent 13 in Xiongnu captivity [^Wild].

This changed in 119 BCE after a series of Han victories over the Xiongnu [^Frankopan22]. These victories allowed the Han to establish control over the Hexi Corridor and <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[19]._layers[20])">The Taklamakan Desert</a>. Gaining control over this space allowed the Han to connect Inner China with the Yuezhi west of the Tian Shan Range, who at this time had formed <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[13]._layers[14])">The Kushan Empire</a> in Bactria [^Liu15]. The Kushan Empire was in turn connected to <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[13]._layers[15])">The Parthians</a> in the east and the Parthians to the kingdoms and empires on the Eastern Mediterranean. Passage between the spaces these empires and kingdoms occupied was open and thus allowed for the flow of goods and ideas, this is in contrast to passage from China to the Xiongnu, which was closed and thus blocked movement.

To preserve their hold over this space and ensure stability the Han established a series of garrison towns along the Hexi Corridor such as <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[61]._layers[3])">Dunhuang</a>, extended the <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[22]._layers[21])">Great Wall</a> along the corridor and into the Taklamakan desert, and imposed a protectorate against the independent states of the Taklamakan Desert [^Liu11]. Under these conditions stability and access through the eastern end of the Silk Road was maintained and small oasis settlements such as <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[71]._layers[9])">Kashgar</a> ballooned in size through the caravan trade [^Liu13]. The Han were forced to pull out of the Regions after the first century CE due to the cost of manning the defenses and the decline of the Han, but by that time the oasis settlements had developed and were both able and interested in maintaining the stability and openness of that space to ensure the passage of goods and ideas [^Liu14].

Now we move to the Roman end of the Silk Road. In the West the Silk Road leaves Parthia through Dura-Europos <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[66]._layers[7])">Dura-Europos</a> and terminates in several large trading centers such as Petra <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[66]._layers[8])">Petra</a> near the Red Sea and Palmyra <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[66]._layers[6])">Palmyra</a> in the Syrian Desert. From these settlements goods could then be dispersed across the Mediterranean world, whether via ports such as Antioch, or across land routes. Roman access to these lucrative trade routes began when Syria was made a province after the defeat of the <a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[13]._layers[16])">Seleucids</a> by Pompey in 63 BCE, and Octavian conquered =<a href="javascript:locateMapFeature(projectMap._layers[13]._layers[17])">Ptolemaic Egypt</a> in 30 BCE after the Battle of Actium [^Frankopan25]. Conquests in the near east opened up access to Asia for Rome and brought in not only considerable income through taxation and trade, but also imports of luxury goods for the wealthy in Rome [^Frankopan27].

As we’ve discussed above the interconnected spaces of the Han, Kushan, and Parthian empires allowed for the passage of goods and idea along those spaces and thus the establishment of trade centers and routes. With the conquest of Egypt and Syria Roman space was directly connected to this spatial corridor from East to West, where before trade routes exiting Palmyra and Petra would have diffused goods throughout Europe and Africa. This led to the establishment of the Rome-China Silk Road in the first century CE which delivered the silk to Rome that Pliny so abhorred.

[^Pliny]: [Pliny, Natural History, Book VI Chapter 20](https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137%3Abook%3D6%3Achapter%3D20)

[^Wild]: [Oliver Wild](https://arquivo.pt/wayback/20160315145417/http://www.ess.uci.edu/~oliver/silk.html)

[^Frankopan22] [Peter Frankopan, The Silk Roads, 22](https://search.library.utoronto.ca/details?11878764)

[^Liu15] [Xinru Liu, The Silk Road in World History, 15](https://search.library.utoronto.ca/details?13483050&uuid=5e9fbe58-4e55-4e76-ad91-2677aecbc1ea)

[^Liu11] [Xinru Liu, The Silk Road in World History, 11](https://search.library.utoronto.ca/details?13483050&uuid=5e9fbe58-4e55-4e76-ad91-2677aecbc1ea)

[^Liu13] [Xinru Liu, The Silk Road in World History, 13](https://search.library.utoronto.ca/details?13483050&uuid=5e9fbe58-4e55-4e76-ad91-2677aecbc1ea)

[^Liu14] [Xinru Liu, The Silk Road in World History, 14](https://search.library.utoronto.ca/details?13483050&uuid=5e9fbe58-4e55-4e76-ad91-2677aecbc1ea)

[^Frankopan25] [Peter Frankopan, The Silk Roads, 25](https://search.library.utoronto.ca/details?11878764)

[^Frankopan27] [Peter Frankopan, The Silk Roads, 27](https://search.library.utoronto.ca/details?11878764)

